DOCSP-45670 Indexes guide (#49)
mongodb/docs-entity-framework: source/fundamentals/indexes.txt

.. _entity-framework-indexes:

=============================
Optimize Queries with Indexes
=============================

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: EF, EF Core, index, optimization, code example

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to use **indexes** in the {+provider-short+}.
Indexes can improve the efficiency of queries and add additional functionality
to querying and storing documents.

Without indexes, MongoDB must scan every document in a collection to find the
documents that match each query. These collection scans are slow and can

> negatively affect the performance of your application. However, if an
> appropriate index exists for a query, MongoDB can use the index to limit the
> documents it must inspect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
negatively affect the performance of your application. However, if you create an
index that covers a query, MongoDB can use the index to limit the
documents it must inspect.
```

To improve query performance, build indexes on fields that appear often in your
application's queries and operations that return sorted results. Each index that
you add consumes disk space and memory when active, so we recommend that you
track index memory and disk usage for capacity planning. In addition, when a

> write operation updates an indexed field, MongoDB updates the related index.

Reviewer: S: this last sentence doesn't really connect to the prev. Consider moving into a note, or changing the transition from "in addition" to something more connected such as "Each write operation that changes an indexed field
triggers an update to the index. This process consumes more memory, so ...."

Author: Agreed, I took this from the server page, but reading it again it didn't seem necessary for this page so I just deleted it

Create an Index
---------------

The {+provider-short+} supports the following types of indexes:

- Single field indexes
- Compound indexes

> - Unique indexes

Reviewer: S; replace these with the refs to the subsections

The examples in this guide use the sample application created in the
:ref:`<entity-framework-quickstart>` guide. After you set up the quick start
application, you can run the examples in this guide by adding the code to the
``OnModelCreating()`` method of the ``PlanetDbContext``, as shown in the following
example:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/indexes.cs
   :language: csharp
   :start-after: start-model-creating
   :end-before: end-model-creating

.. note::

   The {+provider-short+} creates your indexes when you call the
   ``Database.EnsureCreated()`` method. You cannot modify or delete indexes by
   using the provider after they are created. If you 

>    need to modify or delete an index in your application, you must do so by using the
>    {+csharp-driver-short+} directly. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   need to modify or delete an index in your application, you must use the
   {+csharp-driver-short+} directly. 
```

   To learn more about working with indexes in the driver, see the `Indexes

>    <{+driver-docs-root+}/fundamentals/indexes/>`__ guide in the driver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   <{+driver-docs-root+}/fundamentals/indexes/>`__ guide in the {+csharp-driver-short+}
```

   documentation.

The following sections show how to create each of the preceding types of indexes.

Single Field Index
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:manual:`Single Field Indexes </core/indexes/index-types/index-single/>` are
indexes with a reference to a single field within a collection's documents. They
improve single field query and sort performance. The ``_id_`` index is an
example of a single field index.

You can create a single field index by calling the ``HasIndex()`` method with a
lambda expression that specifies the field to index. The following example
creates a single field index on a ``Planet`` entity:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/indexes.cs
   :language: csharp
   :start-after: start-single-field-index
   :end-before: end-single-field-index

Compound Index
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:manual:`Compound indexes </core/indexes/index-types/index-compound>` are

> indexes that combine multiple fields within a collection's documents.
> These indexes improve multi-field query and sort performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
indexes that cover multiple fields within a collection's documents.
These indexes improve multi-field query and sort performance.
```

You can create a compound index by calling the ``HasIndex()`` method with a
lambda expression that specifies the fields to index. The following example
creates a compound index on a ``Planet`` entity:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/indexes.cs
   :language: csharp
   :start-after: start-compound-index
   :end-before: end-compound-index

Unique Index
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Unique indexes ensure that multiple documents don't contain the same value for the
indexed field. By default, MongoDB creates a unique index on the ``_id`` field

> during the creation of a collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
during the creation of a collection. You cannot modify or remove this index.
```

You can create a unique index by creating an index by using the
``HasIndex()`` methods as shown in the preceding sections, then chaining the
``IsUnique()`` method. The following example creates a unique index on a
``Planet`` entity:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/indexes.cs
   :language: csharp
   :start-after: start-unique-index
   :end-before: end-unique-index

Index Options
-------------

> You can specify additional options when creating your index. The following
> sections describe some of the options that you can specify.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can specify options when creating your index to customize xyz... The following
sections describe some of the options that you can specify.
```

Named Index
~~~~~~~~~~~

By default, MongoDB creates an index with a generated name based on the fields
and options for the index. To specify a custom name
for the index, pass in the name as a string when you create the index. The
following example creates a compound index on the ``Planet`` entity with the
name ``"named_order"``:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/indexes.cs
   :language: csharp
   :start-after: start-named-index
   :end-before: end-named-index

Index Order
~~~~~~~~~~~

By default, MongoDB creates indexes in ascending order. You can call the
``IsDescending()`` method when creating a new index to create the index in
descending order. The following example creates a descending index on a
``Planet`` entity:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/indexes.cs
   :language: csharp
   :start-after: start-descending-index
   :end-before: end-descending-index

.. note::

>    Using a descending single field index might negatively impact index
>    performance. For best performance, use only ascending indexes if possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Using a descending single field index might negatively impact index
   performance. For best performance, use only ascending indexes.
```

MongoDB-Specific Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can specify additional MongoDB-specific options when creating an index by using the
``HasCreateIndexOptions()`` method and passing in an instance of the
``CreateIndexOptions`` class of the {+csharp-driver-short+}. You can pass in any
options that the ``CreateIndexOptions`` class supports. To learn more about
the supported options, see the `CreateIndexOptions
<{+driver-api-root+}/MongoDB.Driver/MongoDB.Driver.CreateIndexOptions.html>`__ API
documentation.

The following example creates an index and specifies the ``Sparse`` option to

> make it a :manual:`Sparse Index </core/index-sparse/>`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
create a :manual:`Sparse Index </core/index-sparse/>`:
```

documents it must inspect.

To improve query performance, build indexes on fields that appear often in your
application's queries and operations that return sorted results. Each index that
you add consumes disk space and memory when active, so we recommend that you
track index memory and disk usage for capacity planning.

Create an Index
---------------

The {+provider-short+} supports the following types of indexes:

- :ref:`Single field indexes <entity-framework-single-field-index>`
- :ref:`Compound indexes <entity-framework-compound-index>`
- :ref:`Unique indexes <entity-framework-unique-index>`

The examples in this guide use the sample application created in the
:ref:`<entity-framework-quickstart>` guide. After you set up the quick start
application, you can run the examples in this guide by adding the code to the
``OnModelCreating()`` method of the ``PlanetDbContext``, as shown in the following
example:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/indexes.cs
   :language: csharp
   :start-after: start-model-creating
   :end-before: end-model-creating

.. note::

   The {+provider-short+} creates your indexes when you call the

>    ``Database.EnsureCreated()`` method. You cannot modify or delete indexes by

Reviewer 2: Let's clarify Database.EnsureCreated() is on the dbContext - Database is a property on that rather than a static class.
